Søren Kierkegaard,
Philosophical
Fragments

43

␌␌Philosophical Fragments

The most radically dissenting philosopher of the nineteenth century,
that age of ideology constituted by the range of reactions to the
French Revolution, Søren Kierkegaard would not gain an
international audience until the 1930s and 40s, when he found
recognition as the ﬁrst existentialist philosopher. In an age of seismic
secularization, with Christianity tamed by bourgeois rationalism,
Kierkegaard sought to vindicate a supernaturalist Christianity.
When most thinkers were focused intensely on social and political
matters, Kierkegaard insisted on addressing that single individual :
you and me, in our existential relation to God and to the course of
our own lives.
Born in Copenhagen in 1813 (he would die there in 1855),
Kierkegaard was the seventh child of a brooding and devout
Lutheran father, who imparted to his son a sense of religious dread.
He ﬂoated through his university days, outwardly a socializing and
spendthrift dandy but inwardly unhappy about the vanity of his life.
His father’s death concentrated his spirit—ﬁve of his six siblings and
his mother had already died. He ﬁnally completed a dissertation in
philosophy and became engaged to Regine Olsen in 1840.
Kierkegaard broke oﬀ the engagement after a year, the most decisive
event of his life: he couldn’t see himself making her happy and
couldn’t see harmonizing his vocation as a writer with a settled
family life. But giving up Regine caused him bitter suﬀering, leaving
a wound that never healed. He turned away from an ecclesiastical
career, instead living oﬀ his inheritance in a life of singleness. Later
in 1841, he attended lectures in Berlin (also attended by Bakunin,
Humboldt, Engels, Ranke, Burckhardt) delivered by Schelling, whom
King Friedrich Wilhelm IV had summoned to extinguish “the
dragon-seed of Hegelian pantheism.”

45

␌Søren Kierkegaard

Kierkegaard’s point of contact with contemporary concerns was
Hegel (at least Schelling’s version of him), whose abstract system was
his great enemy. Like Marx, Kierkegaard refused the Hegelian
identiﬁcation of the real with the rational, writing, “The deiﬁcation
of the established order is the secularization of everything.” Unlike
Marx, he did not wish to empower dialectics by giving it economic
substance. Kierkegaard saw the mass conformism of ideology and
global capital’s industrial-commercial society hollowing out our
inwardness; he wanted to maintain the Kantian reserve vis-à-vis the
power of thought. The most stylistically literary philosopher since
Plato, Kierkegaard was not a system builder. He used many
pseudonyms; holding vital truth to be subjective/existential rather
than propositional, he thought indirect communication the only way
to be a true teacher. His vocation as a thinker and writer was to
Socratically foster self-knowledge and progress in the strenuous
process of becoming a Christian—which even entailed assailing the
established Lutheran Church of Denmark in his “attack on
Christendom.”

46

␌Philosophical Fragments
Can a historical point of departure be given for an eternal
consciousness; how can such a point of departure be of more than
historical interest; can an eternal happiness be built on historical
knowledge?

Better well hanged than ill wed.
SHAKESPEARE

Preface
What is oﬀered here is only a pamphlet, proprio Marte, propriis auspiciis, proprio stipendio [by one’s own hand, on one’s own behalf, at
one’s own expense], without any claim to being a part of the scientiﬁcscholarly endeavor in which one acquires legitimacy as a thoroughfare
or transition, as concluding, introducing, or participating, as a coworker or as a volunteer attendant, as a hero or at any rate as a
relative hero, or at least as an absolute trumpeter. It is merely a
pamphlet and will not become anything more even if I, like Holberg’s
magister, were, volente Deo [God willing], to continue it with seventeen others. It has as little chance of becoming something more as a
writer of half-hour pieces has of writing something else even if he writes
folios. The accomplishment is, however, in proportion to my talents,
for I do not, like that noble Roman, refrain from serving the system
merito magis quam ignavia [from justiﬁable motives rather than from
indolence], but I am a loafer out of indolence ex animi sententia [by
inclination] and for good reasons. Yet I do not want to be guilty of
απραγμoσυνη [abstention from public activity], which is a political
oﬀense in any age, but especially in a time of ferment, during which,
in ancient times, it was punishable even by death. But suppose someone’s intervention made him guilty of a greater crime simply by giving
rise to confusion—would it not be better for him to mind his own
business? It is not given to everyone to have his intellectual pursuits
coincide happily with the interests of the public, so happily that it
almost becomes diﬃcult to decide to what extent he is concerned for
his own good or for that of the public. Did not Archimedes sit undisturbed, contemplating his circles while Syracuse was being occupied,
and was it not to the Roman soldier who murdered him that he said
47

␌Søren Kierkegaard
those beautiful words: Nolite perturbare circulos meos [Do not disturb
my circles]? But one who is not that fortunate should look for another
prototype. When Corinth was threatened with a siege by Philip and
all the inhabitants were busily active—one polishing his weapons, another collecting stones, a third repairing the wall—and Diogenes saw
all this, he hurriedly belted up his cloak and eagerly trundled his tub
up and down the streets. When asked why he was doing that, he answered: I, too, am at work and roll my tub so that I will not be the one
and only loafer among so many busy people. Such conduct is at least
not sophistical, if Aristotle’s deﬁnition of sophistry as the art of making money is generally correct. Such conduct at least cannot occasion
any misunderstanding, for it surely would be inconceivable for anyone
to dream of regarding Diogenes as the savior and benefactor of the
city. And of course it is impossible for anyone to dream of attributing
world-historical importance to a pamphlet (something that I, at least,
regard as the greatest danger that could threaten my undertaking)
or to assume that its author is the systematic Salomon Goldkalb so
long awaited in our dear capital city, Copenhagen. For this to happen,
the guilty person would have to be singularly stupid by nature, and,
most likely, by yelling day in and day out in antistrophic antiphonies
every time someone deluded him into thinking that now a new era,
a new epoch, etc. was beginning, he would have so completely bellowed the sparsely IV 177] bestowed quantum satis [suﬃcient amount]
of common sense out of his head that he would have been transported
into a state of bliss, into what could be called the howling madness of
the higher lunacy, symptomatized by yelling, convulsive yelling, while
the sum and substance of the yelling are these words: era, epoch, era
and epoch, epoch and era, the system. The state of one thus blissfully transported is irrational exaltation, since he lives not as if every
day were just one of the intercalary days that occur only every four
years but as if it were one of those that occur only once in a thousand
years, while the concept, like a juggler in this carnival time, has to
keep doing those continual ﬂip-ﬂopping tricks—until the man himself
ﬂips over. Heaven preserve me and my pamphlet from the meddling
of such an uproarious, bustling oaf, lest he tear me out of my carefree contentedness as the author of a pamphlet, prevent a kind and
well-disposed reader from unabashedly looking to see if there is anything in the pamphlet he can use, and place me in the tragic-comic
predicament of having to laugh at my own ill fortune, just as the ﬁne
city of Fredericia must have laughed amid all its ill fortune when it
read in the newspaper the news of a local ﬁre: “The alarm drums
sounded; the ﬁre engines raced through the streets”—although there
is but one ﬁre engine in Fredericia and probably not much more than
48

␌Philosophical Fragments
one street. The newspaper thus compelled one to conclude that the
one ﬁre engine, instead of driving straight to the scene of the ﬁre, did
considerable side-maneuvering on the street. But, of course, my pamphlet seems to be least reminiscent of the beating of an alarm drum,
and its author is least of all inclined to sound an alarm.
But what is my opinion?. . . . . “Do not ask me about that. Next to
the question of whether or not I have an opinion, nothing can be of less
interest to someone else than what my opinion is”. To have an opinion
is to me both too much and too little; it presupposes a security and
well-being in existence akin to having a wife and children in this mortal
life, something not granted to a person who has to be up and about
night and day and yet has no ﬁxed income. In the world of spirit, this
is my case, for I have trained myself and am training myself always to
be able to dance lightly in the service of thought, as far as possible to
the honor of the god and for my own enjoyment, renouncing domestic
bliss and civic esteem, the communio bonorum [community of goods]
and the concordance of joys that go with having an opinion. —Do I
have any reward for this? Do I myself, like the person who serves at
the altar, eat of what is set on the altar? . . . . . That is up to me.
The one I serve is good for it, as the ﬁnanciers say, and good in quite
another sense than the ﬁnanciers understand it. If, however, anyone
were to be so courteous as to assume that I have an opinion, if he were
to carry his gallantry to the extreme of embracing my opinion because
it is mine, I regret his courtesy, that it is extended to one unworthy,
and his opinion, if he does not otherwise have one apart from mine.
I can stake my own life, I can in all earnestness triﬂe with my own
life—not with another’s. I am capable of this, the only thing I am able
to do for thought, I who have no learning to oﬀer it, “scarcely enough
for the one-drachma course, to say nothing of the big ﬁfty-drachma
course” (Cratylus). All I have is my life, which I promptly stake every
time a diﬃculty appears. Then it is easy to dance, for the thought of
death is a good dancing partner, my dancing partner. Every human
being is too heavy for me, and therefore I plead, per deos obsecro [I
swear by the gods]: Let no one invite me, for I do not dance.
J. C.

49

␌Søren Kierkegaard
PROPOSITIO
The question is asked by one who in his ignorance does not even know
what provided the occasion for his questioning in this way.
I
Thought-Project

A.
Can the truth be learned? With this question we shall begin. It was
a Socratic question or became that by way of the Socratic question
whether virtue can be taught—for virtue in turn was deﬁned as insight
(see Protagoras, Gorgias, Meno, Euthydemus). Insofar as the truth is
to be learned, it of course must be assumed not to be—consequently,
because it is to be learned, it is sought. Here we encounter the diﬃculty that Socrates calls attention to in the Meno (80, near the end)
as a “pugnacious proposition”: a person cannot possibly seek what
he knows, and, just as impossibly, he cannot seek what he does not
know, for what he knows he cannot seek, since he knows it, and what
he does not know he cannot seek, because, after all, he does not even
know what he is supposed to seek. Socrates thinks through the diﬃculty by means [of the principle] that all learning and seeking are but
recollecting. Thus the ignorant person merely needs to be reminded
in order, by himself, to call to mind what he knows. The truth is not
introduced into him but was in him. Socrates elaborates on this idea,
and in it the Greek pathos is in fact concentrated, since it becomes a
demonstration for the immortality of the soul—retrogressively, please
note—or a demonstration for the pre-existence of the soul.
In view of this, it is manifest with what wonderful consistency Socrates
remained true to himself and artistically exempliﬁed what he had understood. He was and continued to be a midwife, not because he “did
not have the positive,” but because he perceived that this relation is
the highest relation a human being can have to another. And in that
he is indeed forever right, for even if a divine point of departure is
ever given, this remains the true relation between one human being
and another, if one reﬂects upon the absolute and does not dally with
the accidental but with all one’s heart renounces understanding the
half-measures that seem to be the inclination of men and the secret
of the system. Socrates, however, was a midwife examined by the god
himself. The work he carried out was a divine commission (see Plato’s
Apology), even though he struck people as an eccentric (ατ oπωτ ατ oς
Theaetetus, 149), and the divine intention, as Socrates also understood
50

␌Philosophical Fragments
it, was that the god forbade him to give birth (μαι␎υ␎σθαι μ␎ o θ␎oς
αναγkαζ␎ι, γ␎νναν δ␎ απ␎kωλυσ␎ν [the god constrains me to serve
as a midwife, but has debarred me from giving birth], Theaetetus, 150
c), because between one human being and another [to deliver] is the
highest; giving birth indeed belongs to the god.
Viewed Socratically, any point of departure in time is eo ipso something accidental, a vanishing point, an occasion. Nor is the teacher
anything more, and if he gives of himself and his erudition in any other
way, he does not give but takes away. Then he is not even the other’s
friend, much less his teacher. This is the profundity of Socratic thinking, this his noble, thoroughgoing humanity, which does not exclusively
and conceitedly cultivate the company of brilliant minds but feels just
as kin to a tanner, and for that reason he soon “became convinced
that the study of nature is not man’s concern and therefore began to
philosophize about the ethical in workshops and in the market-place”
(Diogenes Laertius, II, V, 21) but philosophized just as absolutely with
whomever he spoke. With half-thoughts, with higgling and haggling,
with claiming and disclaiming, as if the individual to a certain degree owed something to another person but then again to a certain
degree did not, with vague words that explain everything except what
is meant by this “to a certain degree”—with all such things one does
not go beyond Socrates or reach the concept of revelation, either, but
simply remains in empty talk. In the Socratic view, every human being is himself the midpoint, and the whole world focuses only on him
because his self-knowledge is God-knowledge. Moreover, this is how
Socrates understood himself, and in his view this is how every human
being must understand himself, and by virtue of that understanding
he must understand his relation to the single individual, always with
equal humility and with equal pride. For that purpose, Socrates had
the courage and self-collectedness to be suﬃcient unto himself, but in
his relations to others he also had the courage and self-collectedness
to be merely an occasion even for the most stupid person. What rare
magnanimity—rare in our day, when the pastor is little more than the
deacon, when every second person is an authority, while all these distinctions and all this considerable authority are mediated in a common
lunacy and in a commune naufragium [common shipwreck], because,
since no human being has ever truly been an authority or has beneﬁted anyone else by being that or has ever really managed successfully
to carry his dependent along, there is better success in another way,
for it never fails that one fool going his way takes several others along
with him.
If this is the case with regard to learning the truth, then the fact that
51

␌Søren Kierkegaard
I have learned from Socrates or from Prodicus or from a maidservant
can concern me only historically or—to the extent that I am a Plato
in my enthusiasm—poetically. But this enthusiasm, even though it
is beautiful, even though I wish for myself and for everyone else this
[disposition to passion], which only the Stoic could warn against, although I do not have the Socratic magnanimity and the Socratic selfdenial to think its nothingness—this enthusiasm, Socrates would say,
is still but an illusion, indeed, a muddiness of mind in which earthly
distinction ferments almost grossly. Neither can the fact that the
teaching of Socrates or of Prodicus was this or that have anything but
historical interest for me, because the truth in which I rest was in me
and emerged from me. Not even Socrates would have been capable
of giving it to me, no more than the coachman is capable of pulling
the horse’s load, even though he may help the horse do it by means
of the whip. My relation to Socrates and Prodicus cannot concern me
with regard to my eternal happiness, for this is given retrogressively
in the possession of the truth that I had from the beginning without
knowing it. If I were to imagine myself meeting Socrates, Prodicus,
or the maidservant in another life, there again none of them would be
more than an occasion, as Socrates intrepidly expresses it by saying
that even in the underworld he would only ask questions, for the ultimate idea in all questioning is that the person asked must himself
possess the truth and acquire it by himself. The temporal point of
departure is a nothing, because in the same moment I discover that I
have known the truth from eternity without knowing it, in the same
instant that moment is hidden in the eternal, assimilated into it in
such a way that I, so to speak, still cannot ﬁnd it even if I were to
look for it, because there is no Here and no There, but only an ubique
et nusquam [everywhere and nowhere].
B.
If the situation is to be diﬀerent, then the moment in time must have
such decisive signiﬁcance that for no moment will I be able to forget it, neither in time nor in eternity, because the eternal, previously
nonexistent, came into existence [blev til ] in that moment. With this
presupposition, let us now examine the relations involved in the question: Can the truth be learned?
a. The Preceding State
We begin with the Socratic diﬃculty: How is one able to seek the truth,
since it is indeed equally impossible whether one has it or one does
not. The Socratic line of thought in eﬀect annulled the disjunction,
52

␌Philosophical Fragments
since it appeared that basically every human being possesses the truth.
That was his explanation. We have seen what resulted with regard to
the moment. Now if the moment is to acquire decisive signiﬁcance,
then the seeker up until that moment must not have possessed the
truth, not even in the form of ignorance, for in that case the moment
becomes merely the moment of occasion; indeed, he must not even be
a seeker. This is the way we have to state the diﬃculty if we do not
want to explain it Socratically. Consequently, he has to be deﬁned
as being outside the truth (not coming toward it like a proselyte, but
going away from it) or as untruth. He is, then, untruth. But how,
then, is he to be reminded, or what would be the use of reminding
him of what he has not known and consequently cannot call to mind?
b. The Teacher
If the teacher is to be the occasion that reminds the learner, he cannot
assist him to recollect that he actually does know the truth, for the
learner is indeed untruth. That for which the teacher can become the
occasion of his recollecting is that he is untruth. But by this calling
to mind, the learner is deﬁnitely excluded from the truth, even more
than when he was ignorant of being untruth. Consequently, in this
way, precisely by reminding him, the teacher thrusts the learner away,
except that by being turned in upon himself in this manner the learner
does not discover that he previously knew the truth but discovers his
untruth. To this act of consciousness, the Socratic principle applies:
the teacher is only an occasion, whoever he may be, even if he is a
god, because I can discover my own untruth only by myself, because
only when I discover it is it discovered, not before, even though the
whole world knew it. (Under the assumed presupposition about the
moment, this becomes the one and only analogy to the Socratic.)
Now, if the learner is to obtain the truth, the teacher must bring
it to him, but not only that. Along with it, he must provide him
with the condition for understanding it, for if the learner were himself
the condition for understanding the truth, then he merely needs to
recollect, because the condition for understanding the truth is like
being able to ask about it—the condition and the question contain
the conditioned and the answer. (If this is not the case, then the
moment is to be understood only Socratically.)
But the one who not only gives the learner the truth but provides the
condition is not a teacher. Ultimately, all instruction depends upon
the presence of the condition; if it is lacking, then a teacher is capable
of nothing, because in the second case, the teacher, before beginning to
teach, must transform, not reform, the learner. But no human being
53

␌Søren Kierkegaard
is capable of doing this; if it is to take place, it must be done by the
god himself.
Now, inasmuch as the learner exists [er til ], he is indeed created, and,
accordingly, God must have given him the condition for understanding
the truth (for otherwise he previously would have been merely animal,
and that teacher who gave him the condition along with the truth
would make him a human being for the ﬁrst time). But insofar as the
moment is to have decisive signiﬁcance (and if this is not assumed, then
we do in fact remain with the Socratic), he must lack the condition,
consequently be deprived of it. This cannot have been due to an
act of the god (for this is a contradiction) or to an accident (for it
is a contradiction that something inferior would be able to vanquish
something superior); it must therefore have been due to himself. If
he could have lost the condition in such a way that it was not due to
himself, and if he could be in this state of loss without its being due to
himself, then he would have possessed the condition only accidentally,
which is a contradiction, since the condition for the truth is an essential
condition. The untruth, then, is not merely outside the truth but
is polemical against the truth, which is expressed by saying that he
himself has forfeited and is forfeiting the condition.
The teacher, then, is the god himself, who, acting as the occasion,
prompts the learner to be reminded that he is untruth and is that
through his own fault. But this state—to be untruth and to be that
through one’s own fault—what can we call it? Let us call it sin.
The teacher, then, is the god, who gives the condition and gives the
truth. Now, what should we call such a teacher, for we surely do agree
that we have gone far beyond the deﬁnition of a teacher. Inasmuch as
the learner is in untruth but is that by his own act (and, according
to what has already been said, there is no other way he can be that),
he might seem to be free, for to be on one’s own certainly is freedom.
And yet he is indeed unfree and bound and excluded, because to be
free from the truth is indeed to be excluded, and to be excluded by
oneself is indeed to be bound. But since he is bound by himself, can he
not work himself loose or free himself, for that which binds me should
also be able to set me free at will, and since that is himself, he should
certainly be able to do it. But ﬁrst of all he must will it. But just
suppose that he was very profoundly reminded of that for which that
teacher became the occasion (and this must never be forgotten) of his
recollecting—just suppose that he willed it. In that case (if by willing
it he could do it by himself), his having been bound would become
a bygone state, one that in the moment of liberation would vanish
without a trace—and the moment would not gain decisive signiﬁcance.
54

␌Philosophical Fragments
He would be unaware that he had bound himself and now set himself
free.
Considered in this way, the moment acquires no decisive signiﬁcance,
and yet this was what we wanted to assume as the hypothesis. According to the hypothesis, then, he will not be able to set himself free.
(And this is truly just the way it is, for he uses the power of freedom
in the service of unfreedom, since he is indeed freely in it, and in this
way the combined power of unfreedom grows and makes him the slave
of sin.)
What, then, should we call such a teacher who gives him the condition
again and along with it the truth? Let us call him a savior, for he does
indeed save the learner from unfreedom, saves him from himself. Let
us call him a deliverer, for he does indeed deliver the person who had
imprisoned himself, and no one is so dreadfully imprisoned, and no
captivity is so impossible to break out of as that in which the individual
holds himself captive! And yet, even this does not say enough, for by
his unfreedom he had indeed become guilty of something, and if that
teacher gives him the condition and the truth, then he is, of course, a
reconciler who takes away the wrath that lay over the incurred guilt.
A teacher such as that, the learner will never be able to forget, because
in that very moment he would sink down into himself again, just as the
person did who once possessed the condition and then, by forgetting
that God is, sank into unfreedom. If they were to meet in another life,
that teacher would again be able to give the condition to the person
who had not received it, but he would be quite diﬀerent for the person
who had once received it. After all, the condition was something
entrusted, and therefore the receiver was always responsible for an
accounting. But a teacher such as that—what should we call him? A
teacher certainly can evaluate the learner with respect to whether or
not he is making progress, but he cannot pass judgment on him, for he
must be Socratic enough to perceive that he cannot give the learner
what is essential. That teacher, then, is actually not a teacher but is
a judge. Even when the learner has most fully put on the condition
and then, by doing so, has become immersed in the truth, he still
can never forget that teacher or allow him to disappear Socratically,
which still is far more profound than all unseasonable punctiliousness
and deluded fanaticism—indeed, it is the highest if that other is not
truth.
And, now, the moment. A moment such as this is unique. To be sure,
it is short and temporal, as the moment is; it is passing, as the moment
is, past, as the moment is in the next moment, and yet it is decisive,
55

␌Søren Kierkegaard
and yet it is ﬁlled with the eternal. A moment such as this must have
a special name. Let us call it: the fullness of time.
c. The Follower
When the learner is untruth (and otherwise we go back to the Socratic)
but is nevertheless a human being, and he now receives the condition
and the truth, he does not, of course, become a human being for the
ﬁrst time, for he already was that; but he becomes a diﬀerent person,
not in the jesting sense—as if he became someone else of the same
quality as before—but he becomes a person of a diﬀerent quality or,
as we can also call it, a new person.
Inasmuch as he was untruth, he was continually in the process of
departing from the truth; as a result of receiving the condition in
the moment, his course took the opposite direction, or he was turned
around. Let us call this change conversion, even though this is a word
hitherto unused; but we choose it precisely in order to avoid confusion,
for it seems to be created for the very change of which we speak.
Inasmuch as he was in untruth through his own fault, this conversion
cannot take place without its being assimilated into his consciousness
or without his becoming aware that it was through his own fault, and
with this consciousness he takes leave of his former state. But how
does one take leave without feeling sorrowful? Yet this sorrow is, of
course, over his having been so long in the former state. Let us call
such sorrow repentance, for what else is repentance, which does indeed
look back, but nevertheless in such a way that precisely thereby it
quickens its pace toward what lies ahead!
Inasmuch as he was in untruth and now along with the condition
receives the truth, a change takes place in him like the change from
“not to be” to “to be.” But this transition from “not to be” to “to be”
is indeed the transition of birth. But the person who already is cannot
be born, and yet he is born. Let us call this transition rebirth, by
which he enters the world a second time just as at birth—an individual
human being who as yet knows nothing about the world into which he
is born, whether it is inhabited, whether there are other human beings
in it, for presumably we can be baptized en masse but can never be
reborn en masse. Just as the person who by Socratic midwifery gave
birth to himself and in so doing forgot everything else in the world
and in a more profound sense owed no human being anything, so also
the one who is born again owes no human being anything, but owes
that divine teacher everything. And just as the other one, because of
himself, forgot the whole world, so he in turn, because of this teacher,
must forget himself.
56

␌Philosophical Fragments
If, then, the moment is to have decisive signiﬁcance—and if not, we
speak only Socratically, no matter what we say, even though we use
many and strange words, even though in our failure to understand
ourselves we suppose we have gone beyond that simple wise man
who uncompromisingly distinguished between the god, man, and himself, more uncompromisingly than Minos, Aeacus, and Rhadamanthus—then the break has occurred, and the person can no longer come
back and will ﬁnd no pleasure in recollecting what remembrance wants
to bring him in recollection, and even less will he by his own power be
capable of drawing the god over to his side again.
But is what has been elaborated here thinkable? We shall not be
in a hurry with the answer, for someone who because of prolonged
pondering never comes up with an answer is not the only one who
fails to answer—so too the one who admittedly manifests a marvelous
quickness in answering but not the desirable slowness in considering
the diﬃculty before explaining it. Before we answer, we shall ask
who ought to answer the question. This matter of being born—is it
thinkable? Well, why not? But who is supposed to think it—one who
is born or one who is not born? The latter, of course, is unreasonable
and cannot occur to anyone, for this notion certainly cannot occur to
one who is born. When one who is born thinks of himself as born, he
of course is thinking of this transition from “not to be” to “to be.”
The situation must be the same with rebirth. Or is the matter made
more diﬃcult by this—that the non-being preceding the rebirth has
more being than the non-being that precedes birth? But who, then, is
supposed to think this? It must, of course, be one who is reborn, for
it would be unreasonable to think that one who is not reborn should
do it, and would it not be ludicrous if this were to occur to one who
is not reborn?
If a person originally possesses the condition to understand the truth,
he thinks that, since he himself is, God is. If he is in untruth, then he
must of course think this about himself, and recollection will be unable
to help him to think anything but this. Whether or not he is to go
any further, the moment must decide (although it already was active
in making him perceive that he is untruth). If he does not understand
this, then he is to be referred to Socrates, even though his opinion
that he has gone much further will cause that wise man a great deal
of trouble, as did those who became so exasperated with him when he
took away some foolish notion from them (␎π␎ιδαν τ ινα ληρoν αυτ ων
αφαιρωμαι) that they positively wanted to bite him (see Theaetetus,
151).

57

␌Søren Kierkegaard
In the moment, a person becomes aware that he was born, for his
previous state, to which he is not to appeal, was indeed one of “not to
be.” In the moment, he becomes aware of the rebirth, for his previous
state was indeed one of “not to be.” If his previous state had been
one of “to be,” then under no circumstances would the moment have
acquired decisive signiﬁcance for him, as explained above. Whereas
the Greek pathos focuses on recollection, the pathos of our project
focuses on the moment, and no wonder, for is it not an exceedingly
pathos-ﬁlled matter to come into existence from the state of “not to
be”?
This, as you see, is my project! But perhaps someone will say, “This
is the most ludicrous of all projects, or, rather, you are the most
ludicrous of all project-cranks, for even if someone comes up with a
foolish scheme, there is always at least the truth that he is the one who
came up with the scheme. But you, on the other hand, are behaving
like a vagabond who charges a fee for showing an area that everyone
can see. You are like the man who in the afternoon exhibited for a fee a
ram that in the forenoon anyone could see free of charge, grazing in the
open pasture.” —“Maybe so. I hide my face in shame. But, supposing
that I am that ludicrous, then let me put things right again with a
new project. Admittedly, gunpowder was invented centuries ago; so it
would be ludicrous of me to pretend that I had invented it. But would
it also be ludicrous for me to assume that someone had invented it?
Now I am going to be so courteous as to assume that you are the one
who has invented my project—more courtesy you cannot expect. Or,
if you deny this, will you then also deny that someone has invented it,
that is, some human being? In that case, I am just as close to having
invented it as any other person. Therefore you are not angry with me
because I falsely attribute to myself something that belongs to another
human being, but you are angry with me because I falsely attribute
to myself something that belongs to no human being, and you are just
as angry when I mendaciously want to attribute the invention to you.
Is it not curious that something like this exists, about which everyone
who knows it also knows that he has not invented it, and that this ‘Go
to the next house’ does not halt and cannot be halted, even though one
were to go to everybody? Yet this oddity enthralls me exceedingly, for
it tests the correctness of the hypothesis and demonstrates it. It would
indeed be unreasonable to require a person to ﬁnd out all by himself
that he does not exist. But this transition is precisely the transition
of the rebirth from not existing [at være til] to existing. Whether he
understands it later certainly makes no diﬀerence, for simply because
someone knows how to use gunpowder, knows how to analyze it into
its components, does not mean that he invented it. So go ahead and
58

␌Philosophical Fragments
be angry with me and with any other human being who pretends to
have invented it, but you do not for that reason need to be angry with
the idea.”
II
The God as Teacher and Savior (A Poetical Venture)
Let us brieﬂy consider Socrates, who was indeed also a teacher. He
was born in a speciﬁc situation, was educated among his own people;
and when at a more mature age he felt a call and a prompting, he
began to teach others in his own way. Having lived for some time
as Socrates, he presented himself when the time seemed suitable as
the teacher Socrates. Himself inﬂuenced by circumstances, he in turn
exerted an inﬂuence upon them. In accomplishing his task, he satisﬁed the claims within himself just as much as he satisﬁed the claims
other people might have on him. Understood in this way—and this
was indeed the Socratic understanding—the teacher stands in a reciprocal relation, inasmuch as life and its situations are the occasion
for him to become a teacher and he in turn the occasion for others
to learn something. His relation, therefore, is at all times marked
by autopathy just as much as by sympathy. This was also the way
Socrates understood it, and therefore he refused to accept honor or
honoriﬁc appointments or money for his teaching, because he formed
his judgments with the unbribability of one who is dead. What rare
contentment—how rare today, when no amount of money can be large
enough and no laurels splendid enough to be suﬃcient reward for the
gloriousness of teaching, but all the world’s gold and honors are the
express reward for teaching, since they are equal in value. But our age,
after all, has the positive and is a connoisseur of it, whereas Socrates
lacked the positive. But notice whether this lack explains his narrowness, which presumably was grounded in his being zealous for what is
human and in his disciplining of himself with the same divine jealousy
with which he disciplined others and in which he loved the divine.
Between one human being and another, this is the highest: the pupil
is the occasion for the teacher to understand himself; the teacher is
the occasion for the pupil to understand himself; in death the teacher
leaves no claim upon the pupil’s soul, no more than the pupil can
claim that the teacher owes him something. And if I were a Plato in
my infatuation, and if while hearing Socrates my heart pounded as
violently as Alcibiades’, more violently than the Corybantes’, and if
the passion of my admiration could not be appeased without embracing that glorious man, then Socrates would no doubt smile at me and
say, “My dear fellow, you certainly are a deceitful lover, for you want
to idolize me because of my wisdom, and then you yourself want to
59

␌Søren Kierkegaard
be the one person who understands me best and the one from whose
admiring embrace I would be unable to tear away—are you not really
a seducer?” And if I refused to understand him, his cold irony would
presumably bring me to despair as he explained that he owed me just
as much as I owed him. What rare integrity, cheating no one, not even
the person who in being cheated would stake his eternal happiness.
How rare in this age, in which everyone goes further than Socrates,
both in assessing one’s own value and in beneﬁting the pupil, as well
as in socializing soulfully and in ﬁnding voluptuous pleasure in the hot
compress of admiration! What rare loyalty, seducing no one, not even
the one who employs all the arts of seduction to be seduced!
But the god needs no pupil in order to understand himself, and no
occasion can act upon him in such a way that there is just as much in
the occasion as in the resolution. What, then, moves him to make his
appearance? He must move himself and continue to be what Aristotle
says of him,
[unmoved, he moves all]. But if he moves himself,
then there of course is no need that moves him, as if he himself could
not endure silence but was compelled to burst into speech. But if
he moves himself and is not moved by need, what moves him then
but love, for love does not have the satisfaction of need outside itself
but within. His resolution, which does not have an equal reciprocal
relation to the occasion, must be from eternity, even though, fulﬁlled
in time, it expressly becomes the moment, for where the occasion and
what is occasioned correspond equally, as equally as the reply to the
shout in the desert, the moment does not appear but is swallowed by
recollection into its eternity. The moment emerges precisely in the
relation of the eternal resolution to the unequal occasion. If this is not
the case, then we return to the Socratic and do not have the god or
the eternal resolution or the moment.
Out of love, therefore, the god must be eternally resolved in this way,
but just as his love is the basis, so also must love be the goal, for it
would indeed be a contradiction for the god to have a basis of movement and a goal that do not correspond to this. The love, then, must
be for the learner, and the goal must be to win him, for only in love
is the diﬀerent made equal, and only in equality or in unity is there
understanding. Without perfect understanding, the teacher is not the
god, unless the basic reason is to be sought in the learner, who rejected
what was made possible for him.
Yet this love is basically unhappy, for they are very unequal, and what
seems so easy—namely, that the god must be able to make himself
understood—is not so easy if he is not to destroy that which is diﬀerent.
60

␌Philosophical Fragments
We shall not be in a hurry, and even though some may think that we
are wasting time instead of arriving at a decision, our consolation is
that it still does not therefore follow that our eﬀorts are wasted. There
has been much talk in the world about unhappy love, and everyone
knows what the term means: that the lovers are unable to have each
other. And the reasons—well, there can be a host of them. There is another kind of unhappy love: the love of which we speak, to which there
is no perfect earthly analogy but which we nevertheless, by speaking
loosely for a while, can imagine in an earthly setting. The unhappiness
is the result not of the lovers’ being unable to have each other but of
their being unable to understand each other. And this sorrow is indeed inﬁnitely deeper than the sorrow of which people speak, for this
unhappiness aims at the heart of love and wounds for eternity, unlike
that other unhappiness, which aﬀects only the external and temporal
and which for the high-minded is only something of a jest about the
lovers’ not getting each other in time. This inﬁnitely deeper sorrow
is identiﬁed essentially with the superior person, for he alone also understands the misunderstanding. It is identiﬁed essentially only with
the god, because no human situation can provide a valid analogy, even
though we shall suggest one here in order to awaken the mind to an
understanding of the divine.
Suppose, then, that there was a king who loved a maiden of lowly
station in life. The king’s heart was unstained by the wisdom (loudly
enough proclaimed) unacquainted with the diﬃculties that the understanding uncovers in order to trap the heart and that give the poets
enough to do and make their magic formulas necessary. His resolution
was easy to carry out, for every politician feared his wrath and dared
not even to hint at anything. Every foreign country trembled before
his power and dared not to refrain from sending a congratulatory delegation to the wedding. And no cringing courtier, groveling before
him, dared to hurt his feelings lest his own head be crushed. So let
the harp be tuned; let the poets’ songs begin; let all be festive while
erotic love [Elskov ] celebrates its triumph, for erotic love is jubilant
when it unites equal and equal and is triumphant when it makes equal
in erotic love that which was unequal.
Then a concern awakened in the king’s soul. Who but a king who
thinks royally would dream of such a thing! He did not speak to anyone
about his concern, for if he had done so, any one of his courtiers would
presumably have said, “Your Majesty, you are doing the girl a favor for
which she can never in her lifetime thank you adequately.” No doubt
the courtier would arouse the king’s wrath, so that the king would have
him executed for high treason against his beloved, and thereby would
61

␌Søren Kierkegaard
cause the king another kind of sorrow. Alone he grappled with the
sorrow in his heart: whether the girl would be made happy by this,
whether she would acquire the bold conﬁdence never to remember
what the king only wished to forget—that he was the king and she
had been a lowly maiden. For if this happened, if this recollection
awakened and at times, like a favored rival, took her mind away from
the king, lured it into the inclosing reserve [Indesluttethed ] of secret
sorrow, or if at times it walked past her soul as death walks across
the grave—what would be the gloriousness of erotic love then! Then
she would indeed have been happier if she had remained in obscurity,
loved by one in a position of equality, contented in the humble hut,
but boldly conﬁdent in her love [Kjærlighed ] and cheerful early and
late. What a rich overabundance of sorrow stands here as if ripe,
almost bending under the weight of its fertility, only awaiting the
time of harvest when the thought of the king will thresh all the seeds
of concern out of it. For even if the girl were satisﬁed to become
nothing, that could not satisfy the king, simply because he loved her
and because it would be far harder for him to be her benefactor than
to lose her. And what if she could not even understand him—for if
we are going to speak loosely about the human, we may well assume
an intellectual diﬀerence that makes understanding impossible. What
a depth of sorrow slumbers in this unhappy erotic love! Who dares to
arouse it! Yet a human being will not suﬀer this, for we shall refer him
to Socrates or to that which in a still more beautiful sense is capable
of making unequals equal.
Now if the moment is to have decisive signiﬁcance (and without this
we return to the Socratic, even though we think we are going further),
the learner is in untruth, indeed, is there through his own fault—and
yet he is the object of the god’s love [Kjærlighed ]. The god wants
to be his teacher, and the god’s concern is to bring about equality.
If this cannot be brought about, the love becomes unhappy and the
instruction meaningless, for they are unable to understand each other.
We probably think that this may be a matter of indiﬀerence to the
god, since he does not need the learner, but we forget—or rather,
alas, we demonstrate—how far we are from understanding him; we
forget that he does indeed love the learner. And just as that royal
sorrow is found only in a royal soul and most human languages do not
name it at all, likewise all human language is so self-loving that it has
no intimation of such a sorrow. But the god has kept it to himself,
this unfathomable sorrow, because he knows that he can push the
learner away, can do without him, that the learner has incurred utter
loss through his own fault, that he can let him sink, and he knows
how nearly impossible it is to maintain the learner’s bold conﬁdence,
62

␌Philosophical Fragments
without which understanding and equality disappear and the love is
unhappy. Anyone who does not have at least an intimation of this
sorrow is a lumpish soul with as much character as a small coin bearing
the image neither of Caesar nor of God.
Thus the task is assigned, and we invite the poet—that is, if he has
not already been invited somewhere else, and if he is not the kind of
person who, along with the ﬂutists and other noisemakers, has to be
driven out of the house of sorrow if joy is to enter at all. The poet’s
task is to ﬁnd a solution, a point of unity where there is in truth love’s
understanding, where the god’s concern has overcome its pain, for this
is the unfathomable love that is not satisﬁed with what the object of
love might foolishly consider himself blissfully happy to have.
A. The unity is brought about by an ascent. The god would then
draw the learner up toward himself, exalt him, divert him with joy
lasting a thousand years (for to him a thousand years are as one day),
let the learner forget the misunderstanding in his tumult of joy. Yes,
the learner would perhaps be very much inclined to consider himself
blissfully happy because of this. And would it not be glorious suddenly
to score a great success because the god’s eye fell upon him, just as
it would be for that lowly maiden; would it not be glorious to be of
assistance to him in taking the whole thing in vain, deceived by his own
heart! That noble king, however, already saw through the diﬃculty;
he was something of a connoisseur of human nature and saw that the
girl would be essentially deceived—and one is most terribly deceived
when one does not even suspect it but remains as if spellbound by a
change of costume.
The unity could be brought about by the god’s appearing to the
learner, accepting his adoration, and thereby making him forget himself. Likewise, the king could have appeared before the lowly maiden
in all his splendor, could have let the sun of his glory rise over her hut,
shine on the spot where he appeared to her, and let her forget herself
in adoring admiration. This perhaps would have satisﬁed the girl, but
it could not satisfy the king, for he did not want his own gloriﬁcation but the girl’s, and his sorrow would be very grievous because she
would not understand him; but for him it would be still more grievous
to deceive her. In his own eyes, just to express his love incompletely
would be a deception, even if no one understood him, even if reproach
sought to vex his soul.
In taking this path, then, love does not become happy—well, perhaps
the learner’s and the maiden’s love would seem to be happy, but not
the teacher’s and the king’s, whom no delusion can satisfy. The god
63

␌Søren Kierkegaard
does have joy in adorning the lily more gloriously than Solomon, but
if understanding were at all plausible here, it certainly would be a
tragic delusion on the part of the lily if, in observing the costume, it
considered itself to be the beloved because of the costume. Instead of
standing cheerful in the meadow, playing with the wind, carefree as the
breeze, it presumably would droop and not have the bold conﬁdence to
lift up its head. This was indeed the god’s concern, for the shoot of the
lily is tender and easily snapped. But if the moment is to have decisive
signiﬁcance, how unutterable his concern becomes! There was a people
who had a good understanding of the divine; this people believed that
to see the god was death. —Who grasps the contradiction of this
sorrow: not to disclose itself is the death of love; to disclose itself is
the death of the beloved. The human mind so often aspires to might
and power, and in its constant preoccupation with this thought, as
if achieving it would transﬁgure everything, it does not suspect that
there is not only joy in heaven but sorrow also: how grievous it is to
have to deny the learner that to which he aspires with his whole soul
and to have to deny it precisely because he is the beloved.
B. Therefore, the unity must be brought about in some other way.
Here we are once again mindful of Socrates, for what else was his ignorance but the unitive expression of love for the learner? But, as we
have seen, this unity was also the truth. If, however, the moment is
to have decisive signiﬁcance (—), then this is certainly not the truth,
for the learner owes the teacher everything. Just as the teacher’s love,
Socratically understood, would be only a deceiver’s love if he let the
pupil go on thinking that he actually owed him something, whereas
the teacher was supposed to assist him to become suﬃcient unto himself, so the god’s love—if he wants to be a teacher—must be not only
an assisting love but also a procreative love by which he gives birth to
the learner, or, as we have called him, one born again, meaning the
transition from “not to be” to “to be.” The truth, then, is that the
learner owes him everything. But that which makes understanding
so diﬃcult is precisely this: that he becomes nothing and yet is not
annihilated; that he owes him everything and yet becomes boldly conﬁdent; that he understands the truth, but the truth makes him free;
that he grasps the guilt of untruth, and then again bold conﬁdence
triumphs in the truth. Between one human being and another, to be
of assistance is supreme, but to beget is reserved for the god, whose
love is procreative, but not that procreative love of which Socrates
knew how to speak so beautifully on a festive occasion. Such a love
does not mark the relation of the teacher to the pupil but the relation
of the autodidact to the beautiful as he, ignoring dispersed beauty,
envisions beauty-in-and-by-itself and now gives birth to many beauti64

␌Philosophical Fragments
ful and glorious discourses and thoughts,
[he will ﬁnd the
seed of the most fruitful discourse and the loftiest thought and reap
a golden harvest of philosophy] (Symposium, 210 d); and of this it
holds true that he delivers and brings forth that which he had already
borne within himself for a long time (209 c). He has the condition,
therefore, within himself, and the bringing forth (the birth) is only an
appearing of what was present, and that is why here again in this birth
the moment is instantly swallowed by recollection. It is clear that the
person who is born by dying away more and more can less and less be
said to be born, since he is only reminded more and more clearly that
he exists, and the person who in turn gives birth to expressions of the
beautiful does not give them birth but allows the beautiful within him
to give them birth by itself.
If, then, the unity could not be brought about by an ascent, then it
must be attempted by a descent. Let the learner be X, and this X must
also include the lowliest, for if even Socrates did not keep company
solely with brilliant minds, how then could the god make distinctions!
In order for unity to be eﬀected, the god must become like this one.
He will appear, therefore, as the equal of the lowliest of persons. But
the lowliest of all is one who must serve others—consequently, the
god will appear in the form of a servant. But this form of a servant
is not something put on like the king’s plebian cloak, which just by
ﬂapping open would betray the king; it is not something put on like
the light Socratic summer cloak, which, although woven from nothing,
yet is concealing and revealing—but it is his true form. For this is
the boundlessness of love, that in earnestness and truth and not in
jest it wills to be the equal of the beloved, and it is the omnipotence
of resolving love to be capable of that of which neither the king nor
Socrates was capable, which is why their assumed characters were still
a kind of deceit.
Look, there he stands—the god. Where? There. Can you not see
him? He is the god, and yet he has no place where he can lay his
head, and he does not dare to turn to any person lest that person be
oﬀended at him. He is the god, and yet he walks more circumspectly
than if angels were carrying him —not to keep him from stumbling,
but so that he may not tread in the dust the people who are oﬀended
at him. He is the god, and yet his eyes rest with concern on the human
race, for the individual’s tender shoot can be crushed as readily as a
blade of grass. Such a life—sheer love and sheer sorrow. To want to
express the unity of love and then not to be understood, to be obliged
to fear for everyone’s perdition and yet in this way truly to be able to
save only one single person—sheer sorrow, while his days and hours
65

␌Søren Kierkegaard
are ﬁlled with the sorrow of the learner who entrusts himself to him.
Thus does the god stand upon the earth, like unto the lowliest through
his omnipotent love. He knows that the learner is untruth—what if he
made a mistake, what if he became weary and lost his bold conﬁdence!
Oh, to sustain heaven and earth by an omnipotent “Let there be,” and
then, if this were to be absent for one fraction of a second, to have
everything collapse—how easy this would be compared with bearing
the possibility of the oﬀense of the human race when out of love one
became its savior!
But the form of the servant was not something put on. Therefore the
god must suﬀer all things, endure all things, be tried in all things,
hunger in the desert, thirst in his agonies, be forsaken in death, absolutely the equal of the lowliest of human beings—look, behold the
man! The suﬀering of death is not his suﬀering, but his whole life is
a story of suﬀering, and it is love that suﬀers, love that gives all and
is itself destitute. What wonderful self-denial to ask in concern, even
though the learner is the lowliest of persons: Do you really love me?
For he himself knows where the danger threatens, and yet he knows
that for him any easier way would be a deception, even though the
learner would not understand it.
For love, any other revelation would be a deception, because either
it would ﬁrst have had to accomplish a change in the learner (love,
however, does not change the beloved but changes itself) and conceal
from him that this was needed, or in superﬁciality it would have had
to remain ignorant that the whole understanding between them was
a delusion (this is the untruth of paganism). For the god’s love, any
other revelation would be a deception. Though my eyes were more
ﬂooded with tears than a repentant prostitute’s, and though each and
every tear of mine were more precious than the copious tears of a
pardoned prostitute, and though I could ﬁnd a more humble place than
at his feet and though I could sit there more humbly than a woman
whose heart’s only choice was this one thing needful, and though I
loved him more sincerely than the faithful servant who loves him to
his last drop of blood, and though I were more comely in his eyes than
the purest of women—nevertheless, if I pleaded with him to change
his resolution, to manifest himself in some other way, to spare himself,
then he would look at me and say: Man, what have you to do with me;
go away, for you are of Satan, even if you yourself do not understand
it! Or, if he just once stretched out his hand to bid it happen, and if I
were to think that I understood him better or loved him more, I would
then very likely see him weep also for me and hear him say: To think
that you could become so unfaithful to me and grieve love in this way;
66

␌Philosophical Fragments
so you love only the omnipotent one who performs miracles, not him
who humbled himself in equality with you.
But the form of the servant was not something put on, and therefore he
must expire in death and in turn leave the earth. Though my sorrow
were deeper than the mother’s sorrow when the sword pierces her
heart, and though my situation were more terrible than the believer’s
when the power of faith fails, and though my misery were more moving
than that of the person who cruciﬁes his hope and retains only the
cross—nevertheless, if I pleaded with him to spare himself and remain,
I no doubt would see him grieved unto death, but grieved also for me,
because this suﬀering must be for my beneﬁt; but his sorrow would also
be the sorrow that I could not understand him. O bitter cup —more
bitter than wormwood is the ignominy of death for a mortal—how
must it be, then, for the immortal one! O sour thirst-quencher, more
sour than vinegar —to be refreshed by the beloved’s misunderstanding!
O consolation in distress to suﬀer as one guilty—what must it be, then,
to suﬀer as one who is innocent!
Thus speaks the poet—for how could it occur to him that the god
would reveal himself in such a way as to bring about the most terrible
decision? How could it occur to him to play light-mindedly with the
god’s pain, falsely to poeticize the love away in order to poeticize the
wrath in?
And the learner—has he no share or part in this story of suﬀering,
even though his lot is not that of the teacher? Yet it has to be this
way, and it is love that gives rise to all this suﬀering, precisely because
the god is not zealous for himself but in love wants to be the equal of
the most lowly of the lowly. When an oak nut is planted in a clay pot,
the pot breaks; when new wine is poured into old leather bottles, they
burst. What happens, then, when the god plants himself in the frailty
of a human being if he does not become a new person and a new vessel!
But this becoming—how diﬃcult it really is, and how like a diﬃcult
birth! And the situation of the understanding—in its frailty, how
close it is at every moment to the border of misunderstanding when
the anxieties of guilt disturb the peace of love. And the situation of
understanding—how terrifying, for it is indeed less terrifying to fall
upon one’s face while the mountains tremble at the god’s voice than
to sit with him as his equal, and yet the god’s concern is precisely to
sit this way.
Now if someone were to say, “What you are composing is the shabbiest
plagiarism ever to appear, since it is nothing more or less than what
any child knows,” then I presumably must hear with shame that I am
67

␌Søren Kierkegaard
a liar. But why the shabbiest? After all, every poet who steals, steals
from another poet, and thus we are all equally shabby; indeed, my
stealing is perhaps less harmful since it is more easily discovered. But
who then is the poet? If I were so polite as to regard you, who pass
judgment on me, to be the poet, you perhaps would become angry
again. If there is no poet when there nevertheless is a poem—this
would be curious, indeed, as curious as hearing ﬂute playing although
there is no ﬂute player. Or is this poem perhaps like a proverb, of which
no author is known because it seems as if all humanity had composed
it. And was this perhaps why you called my plagiarism the shabbiest
ever, because I did not steal from any one person but robbed the human race and, although I am just a single human being—indeed, even
a shabby thief—arrogantly pretended to be the whole human race? If
that is the case, then if I went around to every single human being and
everyone certainly knew about it but everyone also knew that he had
not composed it, am I to draw the conclusion that consequently the
human race composed it? Would this not be odd? For if the whole
human race had composed it, this might very well be expressed by saying that each and every person was equally close to having composed
it. Do you not think we have run into some diﬃculty here, although
initially the entire matter seemed to be decided so easily with your
short, angry statement that my poem was the shabbiest plagiarism
and with my shame in having to hear it. So perhaps it is not a poem
at all, or in any case is not ascribable to any human being or to the
human race, either. And I do understand you. You called my conduct the shabbiest plagiarism, because I did not steal from any single
person, did not rob the human race, but robbed the deity or, so to
speak, kidnapped him and, although I am only a single human being—indeed, even a shabby thief—blasphemously pretended to be the
god. Now, my dear fellow, I quite understand you and understand
that your anger is justiﬁed. But then my soul is also gripped with new
amazement—indeed, it is ﬁlled with adoration, for it certainly would
have been odd if it had been a human poem. Presumably it could
occur to a human being to poetize himself in the likeness of the god
or the god in the likeness of himself, but not to poetize that the god
poetized himself in the likeness of a human being, for if the god gave
no indication, how could it occur to a man that the blessed god could
need him? This would indeed be the worst of thoughts or, rather, so
bad a thought that it could not arise in him, even though, when the
god has conﬁded it to him, he adoringly says: This thought did not
arise in my heart — and ﬁnds it to be the most wondrously beautiful
thought. Is not the whole thing wondrous, does not this word come to
my lips as a felicitously foreshadowing word, for do we not, as I in fact
68

␌Philosophical Fragments
said and you yourself involuntarily say, stand here before the wonder
[Vidunderet]. And since we both are now standing before this wonder,
whose solemn silence cannot be disturbed by human wrangling about
what is mine and what is yours, whose awe-inspiring words inﬁnitely
drown out human quarreling about mine and thine, forgive me my curious mistaken notion of having composed it myself. It was a mistaken
notion, and the poem was so diﬀerent from every human poem that it
was no poem at all but the wonder.

69

␌Søren Kierkegaard

70

␌
